README.md, before:

<p align="center">
<img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/9ba39171-29d6-4d4c-8ab8-fd1c9687b83d" alt="Bison" width="256" height="256"></a>
</p>

# Bison

Bison is a fast, lightweight NoSQL database, written in Rust with seamless Python bindings. It combines the speed and safety of Rust with the flexibility of JSON storage, offering a MongoDB-like query language to easily store, query, and manipulate your data. Perfect for developers who need a powerful, schema-less database that integrates smoothly into Python projects, Bison is designed to handle complex queries and efficient updates while keeping your data operations simple and intuitive.

## Features

- **NoSQL Document Storage**: Stores JSON documents in collections.
- **MongoDB-like Query Language**: Use familiar query operators such as `$eq`, `$ne`, `$gt`, `$gte`, `$lt`, `$lte` for filtering documents.
- **Insert and Query**: Easily insert documents into collections and retrieve them based on queries.
- **Update Operators**: Modify documents using `$set`, `$inc`, `$dec`, `$add`, `$substract`, and `$delete` operators.
- **Mixed Queries**: Perform complex queries with multiple conditions and nested fields.
- **Conditional Updates**: Update only the documents that match a query filter.
- **Python Bindings**: Fully integrated with Python via bindings, allowing you to use Bison in Python projects.
- **File Commit**: Changes are committed to disk only when explicitly requested via `db.write()` or `db.write_all()`.

## Installation

To use Bison in your Python project, install it using:

```bash
pip install bison-db
```
## Performance
I decided to compare Bison against TinyDB as it is the most similar database to Bison in terms of purpose.
In our performance benchmarks, Bison is around 2-13x faster than TinyDB (depending on the type of operations and
number of documents).

<p align="center">
  <img height="256" src="https://github.com/ManuConcepBrito/bison/blob/master/docs/0001_1000_ops_1000_docs.png" alt="Bison">
</p>
You can re-create the performance by running:

```bash
pytest -k comparison

```
## Basic Usage

### Creating a Collection and Inserting Documents


```python
from bison import Bison

db = Bison()

# Create a collection
db.create_collection("test")

# Insert documents
db.insert("test", {"a": 10, "b": 20})
db.insert("test", {"a": True, "b": False})
```

### Querying Data


```python
# Simple equality query
result = db.find("test", {"a": 10})
print(result)  # Returns documents where field 'a' equals 10

# Query with greater than operator
result = db.find("test", {"a": {"$gt": 5}})
print(result)  # Returns documents where 'a' is greater than 5
```

### Update Documents Conditionally

You can update documents only when a filter query is matched. If no filter query is provided, all documents in the collection will be updated.


```python
# Conditionally update documents where 'a' equals 10
db.update("test", {"b": {"$set": 30}}, {"a": {"$eq": 10}})

# Update all documents in the collection if no filter is provided
db.update("test", {"b": {"$set": 50}}, None)
```

### Committing Changes to Disk
By default, Bison stores all updates in memory. Changes will only be committed to a file when you explicitly call `db.write(collection_name)` for a specific collection, or `db.write_all()` to write all collections to disk:

```python
# Commit changes of a specific collection to disk
db.write("test")

# Commit changes of all collections to disk
db.write_all()
```

### Update Documents


```python
# Update document by setting a new value
db.update("test", {"a": {"$set": 30}})

# Increment a field
db.update("test", {"a": {"$inc": ""}})

# Decrement a field
db.update("test", {"a": {"$dec": ""}})
```

### Delete Fields


```python
# Delete a field from a document
db.update("test", {"a": {"$delete": ""}})
```

## Query Operators

Bison supports a range of MongoDB-like query operators:

- `$eq`: Matches values that are equal to a specified value.

- `$ne`: Matches all values that are not equal to a specified value.

- `$gt`: Matches values that are greater than a specified value.

- `$gte`: Matches values that are greater than or equal to a specified value.

- `$lt`: Matches values that are less than a specified value.

- `$lte`: Matches values that are less than or equal to a specified value.

### Example Queries


```python
# Equality
result = db.find("test", {"a": {"$eq": 10}})

# Not equal
result = db.find("test", {"a": {"$ne": 20}})

# Greater than
result = db.find("test", {"a": {"$gt": 10}})

# Less than
result = db.find("test", {"a": {"$lt": 100}})
```

## Update Operators

Bison provides several operators for updating fields within documents:

- `$set`: Sets the value of a field.

- `$inc`: Increments a field by 1.

- `$dec`: Decrements a field by 1.

- `$add`: Adds a specified value to a field.

- `$substract`: Subtracts a specified value from a field.

- `$delete`: Deletes a field from a document.

### Example Updates


```python
# Set a value
db.update("test", {"a": {"$set": 40}})

# Increment a field
db.update("test", {"b": {"$inc": ""}})

# Delete a field
db.update("test", {"a": {"$delete": ""}})
```

## Mixed Queries

You can combine multiple query conditions, including nested fields:


```python
# Query with mixed conditions
result = db.find(
    "test",
    {
        "a": {"$eq": {"myobj": 20}},
        "b": {"$gt": 19},
        "c": {"$lte": 120}
    }
)
print(result)  # Returns documents matching all the conditions
```

## Handling Errors

Invalid queries will raise exceptions. For example:


```python
from bison import Bison
import pytest

db = Bison()

# Insert a document
db.insert("test", {"a": 10})

# Invalid query
with pytest.raises(ValueError):
    db.find("test", {"a": {"$gt": False}})
```

Commit message:

Update benchmark image
Update README

README.md, after:

<p align="center">
<img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/9ba39171-29d6-4d4c-8ab8-fd1c9687b83d" alt="Bison" width="256" height="256"></a>
</p>

# Bison

Bison is a fast, lightweight NoSQL database, written in Rust with seamless Python bindings. It combines the speed and safety of Rust with the flexibility of JSON storage, offering a MongoDB-like query language to easily store, query, and manipulate your data. Perfect for developers who need a powerful, schema-less database that integrates smoothly into Python projects, Bison is designed to handle complex queries and efficient updates while keeping your data operations simple and intuitive.

## Features

- **NoSQL Document Storage**: Stores JSON documents in collections.
- **MongoDB-like Query Language**: Use familiar query operators such as `$eq`, `$ne`, `$gt`, `$gte`, `$lt`, `$lte` for filtering documents.
- **Insert and Query**: Easily insert documents into collections and retrieve them based on queries.
- **Update Operators**: Modify documents using `$set`, `$inc`, `$dec`, `$add`, `$substract`, and `$delete` operators.
- **Mixed Queries**: Perform complex queries with multiple conditions and nested fields.
- **Conditional Updates**: Update only the documents that match a query filter.
- **Python Bindings**: Fully integrated with Python via bindings, allowing you to use Bison in Python projects.
- **File Commit**: Changes are committed to disk only when explicitly requested via `db.write()` or `db.write_all()`.

## Installation

To use Bison in your Python project, install it using:

```bash
pip install bison-db
```
## Performance
I decided to compare Bison against TinyDB as it is the most similar database to Bison in terms of purpose.
In our performance benchmarks, Bison is around 2-13x faster than TinyDB (depending on the type of operations and
number of documents). The chart shows the median time to execute 1000 operations on a database with 1000 collections.
Each update triggers a write to file in both Bison and TinyDB.

<p align="center">
  <img height="256" src="https://github.com/ManuConcepBrito/bison/blob/master/docs/0001_1000_ops_1000_docs.png" alt="Bison">
</p>
You can re-create the performance by running:

```bash
pytest -k comparison

```
## Basic Usage

### Creating a Collection and Inserting Documents


```python
from bison import Bison

db = Bison()

# Create a collection
db.create_collection("test")

# Insert documents
db.insert("test", {"a": 10, "b": 20})
db.insert("test", {"a": True, "b": False})
```

### Querying Data


```python
# Simple equality query
result = db.find("test", {"a": 10})
print(result)  # Returns documents where field 'a' equals 10

# Query with greater than operator
result = db.find("test", {"a": {"$gt": 5}})
print(result)  # Returns documents where 'a' is greater than 5
```

### Update Documents Conditionally

You can update documents only when a filter query is matched. If no filter query is provided, all documents in the collection will be updated.


```python
# Conditionally update documents where 'a' equals 10
db.update("test", {"b": {"$set": 30}}, {"a": {"$eq": 10}})

# Update all documents in the collection if no filter is provided
db.update("test", {"b": {"$set": 50}}, None)
```

### Committing Changes to Disk
By default, Bison stores all updates in memory. Changes will only be committed to a file when you explicitly call `db.write(collection_name)` for a specific collection, or `db.write_all()` to write all collections to disk:

```python
# Commit changes of a specific collection to disk
db.write("test")

# Commit changes of all collections to disk
db.write_all()
```

### Update Documents


```python
# Update document by setting a new value
db.update("test", {"a": {"$set": 30}})

# Increment a field
db.update("test", {"a": {"$inc": ""}})

# Decrement a field
db.update("test", {"a": {"$dec": ""}})
```

### Delete Fields


```python
# Delete a field from a document
db.update("test", {"a": {"$delete": ""}})
```

## Query Operators

Bison supports a range of MongoDB-like query operators:

- `$eq`: Matches values that are equal to a specified value.

- `$ne`: Matches all values that are not equal to a specified value.

- `$gt`: Matches values that are greater than a specified value.

- `$gte`: Matches values that are greater than or equal to a specified value.

- `$lt`: Matches values that are less than a specified value.

- `$lte`: Matches values that are less than or equal to a specified value.

### Example Queries


```python
# Equality
result = db.find("test", {"a": {"$eq": 10}})

# Not equal
result = db.find("test", {"a": {"$ne": 20}})

# Greater than
result = db.find("test", {"a": {"$gt": 10}})

# Less than
result = db.find("test", {"a": {"$lt": 100}})
```

## Update Operators

Bison provides several operators for updating fields within documents:

- `$set`: Sets the value of a field.

- `$inc`: Increments a field by 1.

- `$dec`: Decrements a field by 1.

- `$add`: Adds a specified value to a field.

- `$substract`: Subtracts a specified value from a field.

- `$delete`: Deletes a field from a document.

### Example Updates


```python
# Set a value
db.update("test", {"a": {"$set": 40}})

# Increment a field
db.update("test", {"b": {"$inc": ""}})

# Delete a field
db.update("test", {"a": {"$delete": ""}})
```

## Mixed Queries

You can combine multiple query conditions, including nested fields:


```python
# Query with mixed conditions
result = db.find(
    "test",
    {
        "a": {"$eq": {"myobj": 20}},
        "b": {"$gt": 19},
        "c": {"$lte": 120}
    }
)
print(result)  # Returns documents matching all the conditions
```

## Handling Errors

Invalid queries will raise exceptions. For example:


```python
from bison import Bison
import pytest

db = Bison()

# Insert a document
db.insert("test", {"a": 10})

# Invalid query
with pytest.raises(ValueError):
    db.find("test", {"a": {"$gt": False}})
```
